======= Machine learning in science and society =======

During the last two decades there has been a swift and amazing
development of Machine learning techniques and algorithms that impact
many areas in not only Science and Technology but also the Humanities,
Social Sciences, Medicine, Law, etc. Indeed, almost all possible
disciplines are affected. The applications are incredibly many, from self-driving
cars to solving high-dimensional differential equations or complicated
quantum mechanical many-body problems. Machine learning is perceived
by many as one of the main disruptive techniques nowadays. 

Statistics, Data science and Machine learning form important
fields of research in modern science.  They describe how to learn and
make predictions from data, as well as allowing us to extract
important correlations about physical process and the underlying laws
of motion in large data sets. The latter, big data sets, appear
frequently in essentially all disciplines, from the traditional
Science, Technology, Mathematics and Engineering fields to Life
Science, Law, education research, the Humanities and the Social
Sciences.

It has become more
and more common to see research projects on big data in for example
the Social Sciences where extracting patterns from complicated survey
data is one of many research directions.  Having a solid grasp of data
analysis and machine learning is thus becoming central to scientific
computing in many fields, and competences and skills within the fields
of machine learning and scientific computing are nowadays strongly
requested by many potential employers. The latter cannot be
overstated, familiarity with machine learning has almost become a
prerequisite for many of the most exciting employment opportunities,
whether they are in bioinformatics, life science, physics or finance,
in the private or the public sector. This author has had several
students or met students who have been hired recently based on their
skills and competences in scientific computing and data science, often
with marginal knowledge of machine learning.

Machine learning is a subfield of computer science, and is closely
related to computational statistics.  It evolved from the study of
pattern recognition in artificial intelligence (AI) research, and has
made contributions to AI tasks like computer vision, natural language
processing and speech recognition. Many of the methods we will study are also 
strongly rooted in basic mathematics and physics research. 

Ideally, machine learning represents the science of giving computers
the ability to learn without being explicitly programmed.  The idea is
that there exist generic algorithms which can be used to find patterns
in a broad class of data sets without having to write code
specifically for each problem. The algorithm will build its own logic
based on the data.  You should however always keep in mind that
machines and algorithms are to a large extent developed by humans. The
insights and knowledge we have about a specific system, play a central
role when we develop a specific machine learning algorithm. 

Machine learning is an extremely rich field, in spite of its young
age. The increases we have seen during the last three decades in
computational capabilities have been followed by developments of
methods and techniques for analyzing and handling large date sets,
relying heavily on statistics, computer science and mathematics.  The
field is rather new and developing rapidly. Popular software packages
written in Python for machine learning like
"Scikit-learn":"http://scikit-learn.org/stable/",
"Tensorflow":"https://www.tensorflow.org/",
"PyTorch":"http://pytorch.org/" and "Keras":"https://keras.io/", all
freely available at their respective GitHub sites, encompass
communities of developers in the thousands or more. And the number of
code developers and contributors keeps increasing. Not all the
algorithms and methods can be given a rigorous mathematical
justification, opening up thereby large rooms for experimenting and
trial and error and thereby exciting new developments.  However, a
solid command of linear algebra, multivariate theory, probability
theory, statistical data analysis, understanding errors and Monte
Carlo methods are central elements in a proper understanding of many
of algorithms and methods we will discuss.



===== Types of Machine Learning =====


The approaches to machine learning are many, but are often split into
two main categories.  In *supervised learning* we know the answer to a
problem, and let the computer deduce the logic behind it. On the other
hand, *unsupervised learning* is a method for finding patterns and
relationship in data sets without any prior knowledge of the system.
Some authours also operate with a third category, namely
*reinforcement learning*. This is a paradigm of learning inspired by
behavioral psychology, where learning is achieved by trial-and-error,
solely from rewards and punishment.

Another way to categorize machine learning tasks is to consider the
desired output of a system. What kind of inference are you hoping to see in your data? Is the aim to classify a result into categories, to predict a continuous value, or to simply observe patterns within the data? Let’s briefly introduce each class:

- Classification algorithms: are used to predict whether a dataset’s outputs can be separated into separate classes, binary or otherwise. These output values are discrete and represent target classes. An example is to identify  digits based on pictures of hand-written ones. Classification algorithms undergo supervised training, which means they require labelled true output data in order to measure prediction accuracy.

- Clustering algorithms: can also be used for classification or simply to observe data patterns. By observing how the data is arranged within the feature space, clustering algorithms can utilize physical separation to create clusters. As such, some algorithms of this class don’t require output labels, making them unsupervised algorithms.

- Dimensionality reduction algorithms: focuses on decreasing the number of features from your dataset, preventing your models from “overfitting” or generalizing on previously unseen data. They are also unsupervised.

- Regression algorithms: Finding a functional relationship between an input data set and a reference data set. The goal is to construct a function that maps input data to continuous output values. These algorithms also require labelled true output data in order to measure prediction accuracy.


In the natural sciences, where we often confront scientific models with observations, there is certainly a large interest in regression algorithms. However, there are also many examples where other classes of machine-learning algorithms are being used.

All methods have three main ingredients in common, irrespective of whether we deal with supervised or unsupervised learning. 

- Data set: The first, and most important, one is normally our data set (which can be subdivided into training and test data). 

- Model: The second item is a model, which is normally a function of some parameters. The model reflects our knowledge of the system (or lack thereof). As an example, if we know that our data show a behavior similar to what would be predicted by a polynomial, fitting our data to a polynomial of some degree would then determine our model. 

- Cost function: The last ingredient is a so-called cost function, which allows us to present an estimate on how good our model is in reproducing the data it is supposed to describe.  


===== Choice of programming language =====

Python plays a central role in the development of machine
learning techniques and tools for data analysis. In particular, given
the wealth of machine learning and data analysis libraries written in
Python, easy-to-use libraries with immediate visualization (and the
impressive galleries of existing examples), the popularity of the
Jupyter notebook framework (with the possibility to run _R_ codes, or
simulation programs written in compiled languages), and much more made our choice of
programming language for this series of lectures easy. However,
since the focus here is not only on using existing Python libraries such
as _Scikit-Learn_ or _Tensorflow_, but also on developing your own
algorithms and codes, we will as far as possible present many of these
algorithms as Python codes. 

The reason we also  mention compiled languages (like C, C++ or
Fortran), is that Python is still notoriously slow when we do not
utilize highly streamlined computational libraries 
written in compiled languages.  Therefore, analysis codes involving heavy Markov Chain Monte Carlo simulations and high-dimensional optimization of cost functions, tend to utilize C++/C or Fortran codes for the heavy lifting.

Presently thus, the community tends to let
code written in C++/C or Fortran do the heavy duty numerical
number crunching and leave the post-analysis of the data to the above
mentioned Python modules or software packages.  However, with the developments taking place in for example the Python community, and seen
the changes during the last decade, the above situation may change in the not too distant future. 

===== Data handling, machine learning  and ethical aspects =====

In most of the cases we will study, we will generate the data
to analyze ourselves. However, this does not hinder us from developing a sound
ethical attitude to the data we use, how we analyze the data and how
we handle it.

The most immediate and simplest possible ethical aspects deal with our
approach to the scientific process. Nowadays, with version control
software like "Git":"https://git-scm.com/" and various online
repositories like "Github":"https://github.com/",
"Gitlab":"https://about.gitlab.com/" etc, we can easily make our codes
and data sets we have used, freely and easily accessible to a wider
community. This helps us almost automagically in making our science
reproducible. The large open-source development communities involved
in say "Scikit-Learn":"http://scikit-learn.org/stable/",
"Tensorflow":"https://www.tensorflow.org/",
"PyTorch":"http://pytorch.org/" and "Keras":"https://keras.io/", are
all excellent examples of this. The codes can be tested and improved
upon continuosly, helping thereby our scientific community at large in
developing data analysis and machine learning tools.  It is much
easier today to gain traction and acceptance for making your science
reproducible. From a societal stand, this is an important element
since many of the developers are employees of large public institutions like
universities and research labs.

However, this more mechanical aspect of the ethics of science (in
particular the reproducibility of scientific results) is something
which is obvious and everybody should do so as part of the dialectics of
science. 

Before we proceed, we should add a disclaimer. Even though
we may dream of computers developing some kind of higher learning
capabilities, at the end (even if the artificial intelligence
community keeps touting our ears full of fancy futuristic avenues), it is we, yes you reading these lines,
who end up constructing and instructing, via various algorithms, the
machine learning approaches. 

For self-driving vehicles, where the standard machine
learning algorithms discussed here enter into the software, there are
stages where we have to make choices. Yes, we, the humans who wrote
a program for a specific brand of a self-driving car.  As an example,
all carmakers have as their utmost priority the security of the
driver and the accompanying passengers. A famous European carmaker, which is
one of the leaders in the market of self-driving cars, had _if_
statements of the following type: suppose there are two obstacles in
front of you and you cannot avoid to collide with one of them. One of
the obstacles is a monstertruck while the other one is a kindergarten
class trying to cross the road. The self-driving car algo would then
opt for the hitting the small folks instead of the monstertruck, since
the likelihood of surving a collision with our future citizens, is
much higher.

This leads to serious ethical aspects. Why should we
opt for such an option? Who decides and who is entitled to make such
choices? Keep in mind that many of the algorithms you will encounter in
this series of lectures or hear about later, are indeed based on
simple programming instructions. And you are very likely to be one of
the people who may end up writing such a code. Thus, developing a
sound ethical attitude is much needed. The example of the self-driving cars is
just one of infinitely many cases where we have to make choices. When
you analyze data on economic inequalities, who guarantees that you are
not weighting some data in a particular way, perhaps because you dearly want a
specific conclusion which may support your political views?

We do not have the answers here, nor will we venture into a deeper
discussions of these aspects, but we want you think over these topics
in a more overarching way.  A statistical data analysis with its dry
numbers and graphs meant to guide the eye, does not necessarily
reflect the truth, whatever that is.  As a scientist, and after a
university education, you are supposedly a better citizen, with an
improved critical view and understanding of the scientific method, and
perhaps some deeper understanding of the ethics of science at
large. Use these insights. Be a critical citizen. You owe it to our
society.

 

